# DANA Valencia Observations

Writing some thoughts here about the coordination during the DANA in Valencia and how it can be improved (e.g. with a more central platform to organise donations or help). Hopefully one can also learn how to be better prepared for the future with these observations.

The main purpose of this repo is to create some form of helpful tool for those affected in Valencia due to the DANA. We have been volunteering in different affected zones and there seems to be little to no coordination on e.g. the distribution of donations. Me and some other volunteers were in Catarroja e.g. yesterday and there were donated clothes in piles (becoming dirty from just being dumped on the ground) in the gas station. There are also different buildings that have turned into donation stations but there is no central platform where there is information about this. 

## Compiled ideas for centralised platform:
- real-time map of affected areas: an interactive map where volunteers can see zones that need help, prioritised based on urgency and population needs. Users can e.g. pin their location and request specific type of help or resources.
- supply and donation tracking: a feature for tracking donation needs so that special supplies (lactosefree milk, glutenfree food, pet food, medical supplies) can be routed to areas that need them the most.
- resource request and matchmaking: there should be a mirrored system where people affected can request specific items or support (gloves, masks, shovels, medicine, food, water).
- efficient volunteer management: volunteers can sign up on the platform and e.g. tag that they have certain medical expertise. Maybe someone is an electrician and can help with related tasks. Maybe someone else owns a tractor and can help in the cleanup effort of debris. Maybe someone is a chef and is able to supply very large pans for cooking large amounts of food for people affected and volunteers. I think people should have some things on their profile about themselves - such as shoe size, meal preferences/allergies/disabilities, location and so on. This way it is easier to meet everyones needs before they go out to help in different affected areas.
- organized access and mapping: some affected areas might be very difficult to access using traditional routes. It would be helpful to have a feature where volunteers themselves map out the easiest and most effective way to access these areas. Another sub-feature of this could be organised carpools where volunteers that don´t have have access to certain forms of transportation or e.g. have physical disabilities can still help out by joining other volunteers that have access to cars.
- coordinated events: volunteers (I feel like there might need to be some sort of limited access for who is able to create an event) can create events to coordinate groups of volunteers. Let´s say e.g. volunteers from city A that want to help out in city B that has been affected. Someone creates an event to organise this. When signing up for the event each volunteers information is also submitted so that e.g. if boots are provided - the organiser knows which sizes to prepare. Each volunteer is also sent a check list of things to prepare and can also read about safety precautions (importance of wearing gloves, masks etc.).
- real-time communication channel/forum: where volunteers and affected are able to share real-time updates depending on which area they are from or are currently in. Here people can also communicate changing needs in affected areas - maybe there are a lot of donations in an easily-accesible area meanwhile an area further away which is difficult to access has barely had any donations transported to them.
- feedback-mechanism: the platform should be open to receive feedback for future improvements.
- alert mechanism: there might be more storms/rain/flooding risks in the near future and people should be encouraged to stay at home or take shelter well in advance instead of being encouraged to volunteer when there is a risk of this happening again. 

## My personal experiences from volunteering in Valencia after DANA: 

As a volunteer (not organised by the Valencian government) you walk to different affected areas - e.g. crossing the bridge from Valencia city to La Torre and from there you try to find somebody who either needs help or who can tell you where you can help. The further away you get from the city, the fewer volunteers you will find and also the most people that are in need of help. The access to these places is also very difficult and sometimes you have to choose alternative paths such as walking on the train tracks due to the road not being accesible. 

### Donation and coordination station in Sedavi

In one donation station where we were in Sedavi there were large trucks arriving with a lot of donations but there was a need to organise people to e.g. create a line of people that could carry the heavy boxes into the building. Inside of the building you also need people who can organise the different types of food or materials that is coming in. I was one of the people organising the donations inside the building and noticed that there was only one bag of glutenfree pasta coming in that we separated to the side. Throughout the day there was no more glutenfree items that we could put in that pile and it made me think about how there might be several people with celiac disease or other disorders in this particular zone that are in need of special food or medications and that it would be nice to have some sort of registry of that. 

### Necessary materials for cleaning in La Torre

Other things that are important are the materials used to clean the streets/houses such as brooms and shovels. Almost everytime we have been volunteering, we have left our brooms in places where we have been cleaning because usually there are other people there that need them for the next day. When we´re coming the next day we need to find new brooms and sometimes we have been walking quite far and realised that there is too little cleaning material at the place where we have arrived to help. As the days pass the water and mud also becomes more contaminated and it is important to stay safe with the use of e.g. masks, gloves or boots. It has been quite easy to get masks as there is pretty much just that one street that every volunteer crosses to get to the bridge to cross to La Torre (if that´s where you´re entering) and usually there is a table there where people are handing out masks (also bread, water, coffee etc). Boots have been quite hard to find but I have heard of stations where they hand them out. They were handing some boots out at La Torre but it was only for residents living in La Torre. 

### Volunteers with cars providing free material and gear

There are also people coming with their cars and if you pass one of them they might ask you if you need anything - yesterday in Catarroja we were lucky to pass one of these cars and they gave us thick gloves and also whole suits which will be very helpful to stay dry while cleaning in the mud. There was also a nice person close to the Joaquin Sorolla station who asked us if we were going to La Torre and gave us (5 people) each a pair of waterproof work pants which was we appreciated very much. 

### Safety

I wonder how safe it is that we are pushing so much muddy water down the drain of whichever street we are one. As the days pass (which have been quite warm also) the mud also gets thicker and dries up and instead of pushing it down the drain we gather it in piled outside the houses to be taken away by tractors (I assume). However I have still seen people push down quite thick mud down the drain so I wonder if this might cause some problems in the future. We were also helping out with clearing a basement (shared by some houses on a street) filled with water, mud and other materials. In the early hours we were just bringing up buckets with water, mud and other smaller things that had been sugmerged in the basement. After a while we were being handed (by the poeple wading through the water in the basement to fill the buckets for us who brought it outside the house to dump it across the street in a big pile) these large bricks which I later found out were part of a wall in the basement. I wonder how common this is among the other basements in houses affected and how dangerous this will be for the actual stability of the houses. 

### Joining the organised volunteer effort by the Valencian government 

Some more observations now a day after trying to join the buses that are bringing volunteers out to affected areas, organized by the Generalitat Valenciana. Yesterday (Friday the 8th) we decided to instead of going by foot to an affected area to try joining the organized effort by the Valencian government. One of the people in our group had already joined one of the first buses (a week ago) and had said that they were barely able to help anyone. First they had to queue at the city of arts and sciences for approx 2 hours before they could take off with a bus. Then for the rest of the day they basically went from town to town and asked them if they needed help where they got the answer that no they did not need any help right now. My understanding from different social media platforms and news channels also painted this picture of volunteers being driven to places where they either did not need that much help or where they were prioritising public places over civilian homes (e.g. volunteers beeing brought to the Bonaire shopping mall to clean the stores). Although we had heard these stories we thought that they might be better organised this time and decided to it out for one day. One of us found a link to sign up through an instagram account specifically made for volunteers in valencia (after DANA). So we signed up the night before and got a QR code. You could choose between arriving at 8:30 or 9:00. Well at the city of arts and sciences the next morning we could see that the turnout was far smaller than the first time (as we had seen on images and news channels - were thousands of people showed up). This time we were a couple of hundred I would guesstimate. But it could be due to different factors - it was also a weekday and maybe people chose to volunteer independently. So we waited in line to be assigned a group. We were then led into one of the buildings where they had different stations where we could take things like gloves, masks, all-purpose cleaner, cleaning suits, a bag with breakfast etc. You kind of just follow the person in front of you and unfortunately the person in front of me did not follow the whole route to all the stations and instead went to the exit so I followed them to the exit. I don´t blame them however because the layout was not very straightforward. Some people did the same mistake and went out to the exit. This resulted in some people in the group not having enough gear. E.g. some people did not get boots. I was one of these people (but I also found out later that they only had a very small set of sizes left anyways). Finally outside the building one of the organisers asked you if this was your group and that´s difficult to say due to the rush of things I think. You know that it´s your group if you´ve been assigned a number or a leader, but at this stage there was no such thing. You´re just grouped together with enough people to fill a bus. 

And then when we finally took off with the bus we had a group leader who was in charge of us and checked of our names on they way back. We went to the town of Utiel but I did not feel like we were being very helpful or effective there. We did help cleaning out (to an extent) a school gym which was filled about 20-30 cm up with mud. But after that we were taken to a park to clean up mud around the trees for a while. After that they took us to a street to sweep some leaves that had and were falling from the trees off of the street. And that to me felt quite ridiculous as leaves falling off of trees is a natural phenomenon that happens during the fall - and you don´t need 40 volunteers sweeping leaves when they could be helping people who e.g. need to clean their homes. There was an older man who needed help with loading a truck with e.g. furniture and other things that had been destroyed due to the flooding outside of his house. We saw him during a snack break and on our own accord went there to help him. I feel like this was the most helpful that we were that day in Utiel. We thus decided, to in the future, volunteer independently and on our own go to different areas we know have been affected and need more help. 

### How I think the organised volunteer effort by the Valencian government could have been improved

So how I think this process could have been improved. Already when you sign up for the form for volunteers they should also ask you about food preferences - we were e.g. given muffins and water for breakfast - some people have intolerences (celiac disease, allergies, vegetarians/vegans etc). There should be a form for this so that everyone is fed. Another thing is that I think there should be a checklist so that you know that you have everything you need be safe while you clean - but also that you have the right materials for cleaning before you enter the buss. Boots are also so important - I feel like it has been incredibly difficult to find boots during this - and I have instead been putting plastic bags around my feet and then worn some old sneakers. This has not always been very effective as my feet have sometimes gotten wet anyways. Yesterday they did have boots for volunteers but they ran out of sizes for a lot of people - one way to be prepared and have enough boots for everyone would be to ask everyone to write down their shoe size in the form when they signed up. 
